Hello, I'm professor Brian Bushee.
Welcome back.
In this video,
we're gonna take a look at forecasting.
We're gonna see how you could use
a company's historical financial
statements in order to forecast
future balance sheets,
income statements and
cash flow statements.
We're gonna start by putting together
something called common size financial
statements from the historical
financial statements.
We can use these common size statements
along with sales growth forecasts,
in order to forecast all three of
the financial statements into the future.
Once we have those forecasted statements,
then we can tweak assumptions for
individual line items and
see how that would effect all
of the forecasted statements.
Let's get started.
Before we start to work on forecasting,
the first thing we need to do is talk
about common size financial statements.
There are a couple benefits to doing
common size financial statements.
One is it's gonna remove
the effects of growth,
which will help you better spot
trends in the financial statements.
So, one of the problems is
that growth in assets or
growth in sales drives almost all of the
trends in the line items on the balance
sheet and income statement respectively.
So we're gonna use common sizing to
take out that growth which allows to see
whether certain line items on the balance
sheet or income statement are growing
more or less that we'd expect given
the total growth in assets and sales.
The second benefit is it's gonna help us
put together forecasted future financial
statements.
What you're gonna see is we're gonna
combine historical common size statements
with growth forecasts of sales and
assets to get future financial statements.
So, we're gonna put together a common size
balance sheet in which we express all
numbers on the balance sheet as
a percentage of total assets.
A common sized income statement where we
express all the numbers on the income
statement as a percentage of sales.
And then the cash flow statement
is typically not common sized.
>> I have an intense dislike for
the Cash Flow Statement.
I am so
glad we do not have to common size it.
>> But what is the rationale for doing so?
>> There are a couple reasons why we don't
do common sized cash flow statements.
The first is that there's not an obvious
number to use to common size it.
I mean, we could use the change in cash,
but if that was close to zero,
then the common size ratios
would be close to infinity.
Or if the change in cash was negative and
one of the line items was negative,
you'd end up with a positive number.
So it would be hard to interpret
if we tried to common size.
The second reason is we don't really need
to common size the cash flow of statement
to forecast it because if we forecast the
income statement and forecast the balance
sheet, we can use those two together to
put together the cash flow statement.
In a sense the cash flow statement is
redundant because it's just a combination
of the other two statements.
If you take a look at the Woof Junction
spreadsheet, there is a tab for
common size finance statements.
Here's the commons size balance sheet and
what I've done, and you can check this
with the formulas, is taken original value
of each line item divided it by total
assets to get the percent of total assets
which is why total assets is equal to one.
Same thing with total liabilities and
equity because that has
to equal total assets that hold
balance sheet equation thing.
And so what this allows you
to do is look at trends and
line items where you've taken
out growth in the company.
So we can see inventory has gone down
as a percent of assets over time.
For the income statement we divide
all the line items by sales.
So you can see sales
has a value of one and
everything else is a percentage of sales.
And you've seen a lot of
these before because these
are basically the profitability
sub-ratios that we looked at earlier,
where we took a lot of these line
items as a percent of sales.
And then we don't common size
the cash flow statement.
Now that we've put together common
size historical balance sheets and
income statements, we can now
forecast future financial statements.
And another word for
projected future financial
statements is pro forma statements.
So I'll use those terms interchangeably.
Step one is to forecast future sales.
All of the other line items
on the balance sheet and
the income statement are going to be
a function of our future sales forecasts.
>> Wait.
How on earth does one forecast sales?
>> I'm glad you said how on
Earth do we forecast sales,
because I was about to tell
you how to do it on Mars.
So, forecasting sales is obviously tricky,
because we're trying to
forecast the future.
The best starting point is
historical sales growth.
Then adjust that for
any additional information you
have about future prospects.
So if the company has some good growth
opportunity as your plan's in place,
maybe you make sales growth
higher than historical, or
if they seemed to have reached the limits
of their growth potential or expansion,
then maybe you make sales growth in the
future lower than it's been historically.
There's a lot more art than
science to it and ultimately,
what you wanna do is play around
with different forecast assumptions.
So in the spreadsheet, it's easy to try
different sales forecast assumptions and
see how it affects all of your
forecasted future financial statements.
Step two,
we can use our forecasted sales for
each year in the future to put
together pro forma income statements.
So all we need to do is take
the forecasted sales for
the year, times those forecasted
common size ratios for
each line item to get the value of each
line item on the income statement.
For example, if we wanted to
forecast SG&A expense, we would take
forecasted sales for the year,
times the forecasted SG&A to sales ratio.
Step three is we can use forecasted sales
to construct a pro forma balance sheet.
I'm gonna have to show you
that on the next slide.
And then the final step is we can use
the pro forma income statement and
pro forma balance sheets to construct
a pro forma statement of cash flows.
So let's talk about how to
project the balance sheet.
So we can take our forecasted sales and
use the total asset turnover
ratio to forecast for future total
assets at the end of the year.
And that's because the turnover ratio,
if you remember,
is a ratio of sales to assets.
So the total asset turnover ratio or TATR
is sales divided by average total assets.
What we can do is solve for
forecasted total assets in a period.
As two times forecasted sales
divided by turnover ratio.
Minus total assets of the prior period.
>> I am a certified genius for my age.
But you really lost me
with this TATR stuff!
>> So one of the most difficult things
about putting together an online course,
well other than not being able to
make eye contact with your students,
is that you all have such variation in
backgrounds and experiences, in terms of
courses that you've taken in the past and
in terms of your affinity for mathematics.
So I'm trying to run a middle course here,
where I will provide all these formulas.
So if you love mathematics you
can get into the formulas but
if you're somebody who doesn't like math,
no problem.
Just ignore the formulas and
the technical stuff here and
just trust that everything is programmed
in the spreadsheet correctly.
So as long as you don't make
any changes to the formulas
in the spreadsheet everything
will work out fine.
Next, we multiply the forecasted total
assets at the end of the year times
the forecasted common size ratio for
every asset and liability line item.
For example, if we wanted to forecast
inventory, we would take the forecasted
total assets at the end of the year times
the forecasted ratio of inventory to
assets to get the forecasted
inventory at the end of the year.
Once we forecast all the assets and
all the liabilities,
then we can forecast stockholders' equity.
And it's just gonna be the difference
between all the forecasted assets and
the forecasted liabilities because
remember that balance sheet equation,
assets have to equal liabilities
plus stockholders' equity.
Now we have to do one technical refinement
that I've built into this spreadsheet.
And we wanna smooth the forecasted total
assets to eliminate something called
the saw-tooth effect.
So what we're gonna do is forecast
unsmoothed total assets using
the equation above.
Then calculate the projected
average growth rate in assets
over the horizon we're forecasting.
And use that average growth rate to
project a smoothed asset growth series,
so that we don't have
the saw-tooth effect.
>> You are probably expecting me to ask,
do we have to forecast par value?
But I am not.
I would rather see an example
of this saw-tooth effect.
>> That's an excellent idea,
why don't we spend about
two minutes going through an example
of how the saw-tooth effect works?
And then we'll get to
the Woof Junction spreadsheet.
Let me give you a quick example of
how this saw-tooth effect works,
and how we can correct it.
So let's forecast the company
having 100 in sales every year.
And we'll forecast that their total
asset turnover ratio is 2 every year.
So we can use sales and
total asset turnover ratio to
calculate average total assets.
Cuz the total asset turnover
ratio is sales over total assets.
So we have 2 equals 100 divided by x,
x is 50.
So if we know that average
total assets were 50 and
the total assets at
the beginning of the year,
the previous ending total assets was 40,
then what we can do is we can take 2
times the average minus the previous to
figure out ending total assets of 60.
Or the other way to look at it is sixty is
the number where when we take the average,
we end up with a value of fifty.
In year two average, total assets
is still expected to be fifty.
But now that's going to bring us back
down to forty to get that average, and
as you can see it's gonna saw-tooth.
It's gonna bounce up and
down like the teeth on a saw
every year because of the way
we're doing the forecasting.
If we have high forecasted sales
growth it gets even worse.
We see a bigger up and
down in this saw-tooth pattern.
So the way we're gonna correct it is we're
gonna try to figure out what's the growth
rate every year that gets us
from 40 to 150 over the 5 year
forecast horizon period.
And we can calculate that by
taking 150 divided by 40 and
then raising that to the 1/5 power to
get a compound growth rate of 1.3.
Which means that basically,
if you start at 40 and
you grow assets by 30% every year,
they'll get to 150 after five years.
So then what we'll do when we forecast
total assets is we'll start with 40, and
then we'll make it grow each year by 1.3.
And so what this'll do is it'll grow
very smoothly from 40 up to 150,
as opposed to exhibiting
this saw-tooth effect.
So now let's try to apply
this to Woof Junction.
So there's a tab in the spreadsheet
called Assumptions.
And what I've got here are just some
basic assumptions to generate financial
statements into the future,
the pro forma financial statements.
What you can do on your own is you can
change any of these assumptions and
see how the statements will change.
So starting with sales growth,
I just forecasted five years of
their historical average growth.
Then I had a drop to five percent,
which is the industry average.
You could put any kind of pattern in here
you want, or thought was appropriate.
But once you forecast sales,
then you can use the historical
averages from the common size
to forecast all the line items.
Then you forecast total asset turnover.
And again, I just took the historical
average as a starting point.
Then we're gonna go down here
to the saw-tooth calculation.
So what this will do for
you is it will calculate the total assets
using the total assets turnover ratio.
You get a little bit of saw-toothing
going on, or at least uneven growth.
Then we figure out what's
the growth rate over this horizon,
what's the growth rate over this horizon.
Apply that to total assets to get
a much smoother growth in total assets.
Once we get a smoother growth then what
I take is the historical average of
the common size ratios for
the balance sheet to forecast
out each of the line items.
And so it'll look like this.
Where every line item in the balance
sheet is the assumption for
the cash to total assets ratio times the
total assets I forecasted during the year.
The total assets all come from the
saw-tooth calculation and then we forecast
an income statement where we start with
sales growth and then each line item
is the forecasted ratio of the line item
to sales times whatever the sales is.
Once you get the balance sheet income
statement, you can go through and
take a look at the formulas.
But it basically allows you to put
together a statement of cash flows.
And also, ratios.
So you can go look at these
ratios into the future,
to see if your pro forma
financial statements makes sense.
So again, this is just a base case.
What you can do on your own is change
anything in the assumptions tab,
and it will recalculate everything
automatically in the spreadsheet.
There are a couple other refinements
you can do in forecasting.
One is to try to decompose the net
increase and property plan and
equipment into how much is
purchases of new PP and
E verses stuff that's retired either
because it's sold or it wears out.
And also you can decompose the change
in stockholder's equity and
how much is net income verses dividends
and net share repurchases, and wait.
Is that snoring that I hear?
Okay, okay, I get the point,
enough technical details.
These probably are more than you really
need to know but if you are interested,
you can go through
the details on the slide.
And then more importantly,
bring up the spreadsheet and
I have all the calculations
on the assumptions tab.
Which shows you how to do
these additional refinements.
That wraps up our brief
look at forecasting.
Obviously there's a lot more that
I could have done with this.
But we've hit all the basics.
And now I think the key thing is for you
to get comfortable using that spreadsheet.
So I thought about shooting more video
where I played around with some of
the assumptions and showed you how
the financial statements change and
the ratios change.
But it's probably better
learning experience for
you to do it yourself
than to watch me do it.
So I strongly encourage you to get
out the Woof Junction spreadsheet.
Changed some of the assumptions
individually and take a look at
how it changes the forecasted financial
statements and the forecasted ratios.
After you're done playing around with
all the assumptions, come back here and
I'll see you next time.
>> See you next video.